The novel, or new, coronavirus, officially named SARS-CoV-2
is spread through droplets in the air
after coughing or sneezing,
which people nearby can take in through
their nose, mouth or eyes.
The virus can also spread by touching a contaminated surface,
but it’s unclear how long the virus lives on surfaces.
Once inside your body,
the virus travels quickly to the back of your nasal passages
and to the mucous membranes in the back of your throat.
The virus attaches to a receptor called
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, or ACE2,
on respiratory cells in your body.
The virus’s genetic material enters your cells.
The virus then “hijacks” your cells to produce
copies of itself which go on to infect more cells.
Symptoms often start in the back of the throat,
with a dry cough and sore throat,
along with a fever.
Symptoms become more severe as the infection
starts making its way to your lower respiratory tract.
Here, it can cause more respiratory problems like bronchitis and pneumonia.
When the virus reaches your lungs,
it causes inflammation in the air sacs in your lungs,
which are called alveoli.
Your alveoli are where oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged.
In pneumonia there is swelling, decreased airflow,
and your alveoli start to fill with fluid,
causing shortness of breath and difficulty breathing.
Less oxygen in your blood deprives other major organs of oxygen
including your liver, kidney and brain.
Acute respiratory distress,
caused by widespread swelling in the lungs,
stops your body from getting the oxygen it needs to survive.
This respiratory distress can lead to organ failure and death.